feeling the heat of the war on Gaza
Israel says the fighting is costing it
millions of dollars every day and the
devastation in the strip is
unprecedented so what's the real cost to
both sides and what's the impact in the
region and globally this is Inside
Story
[Music]
hello and welcome to the program I'm Tom
McCrae a depleted Workforce the closure
of schools and businesses and now
spiraling military expenses economists
warn the cost to Israel of its war on
Gaza will be unlike anything it has
experienced in decades Israel's
declaration of war more than three weeks
ago following a surprise attack by Hamas
has jolted Global Financial and energy
markets now International financial
institutions say the ongoing conflict
will have bigger more severe risks for
the global economy we'll be discussing
those issues with our panel in just a
few minutes but first this report by
Cara
Le day after day Israel's devastating
attacks keep
coming under siege by air sea and land
Gaza faces a humanitarian and economic
catastrophe but as Israel escalates its
military offensive the war on Gaza is
also hitting its own economy since Hamas
launched its operation more than 3 weeks
ago Israel's stocks and currency have
fallen many of its businesses and
schools remain closed and International
Airlines have canel flights now its
government has been forced to roll out a
major wartime stimulus program that's
expected to raise public debt already
three credit rating agencies have warned
Israel's creditworthiness could be
downgraded with the S&P Global ratings
agency changing its Outlook from stable
to negative that hasn't phased this man
Israel's Finance Minister who says he
doesn't yet have a full assessment of
the cost of the war after announcing the
national budget was no longer relevant
the cost of war is expected to increase
Israel's near $500 billion economy is
one of the most developed in the Middle
East it's expected to contract by 5% in
the final quarter of the Year known as
the nation for startups it's tech
industry that accounts for 18% of its
GDP and half of all exports is suffering
production at a major offshore gas field
that's reported to provide 70% of the
country's energy needs has stopped and
its currency has lost value against the
dollar almost every day for the past 3
weeks hitting an 8-year low with a cost
of War at around 246 million doar per
day the indirect costs are expected to
increase exponentially it's a very
difficult situation it's a war uh uh
people are uh lots of people have been
drafted in the Army and left the job
market uh there's there are uncertainty
there are
concerns uh that reduce people
incentives to invest both uh outside
money coming to Israel and and
internally US president Joe Biden has
pledged an unprecedented funding package
for Israel but the fate of that request
rests in the hands of Congress the World
Bank has also warned that the global
economy is at a dangerous juncture and
facing what it called real risks Cara
leg for Inside
[Music]
Story let's bring in our guest now in
West Jerusalem is manim Klein professor
of political itical science at Balan
University he is also the author of
lives in common Arabs and Jews in
Jerusalem Jaffa and Hebron in Colchester
is Natasha Linate US policy and foreign
policy specialist she is the Deputy Dean
in the department of government at the
University of Essex and in Alexandria
Virginia is Yousef Mania head of the
Palestine Israel program and Senior
fellow at the Arab Center a warm welcome
to all of you thank you for joining us
here on Inside Story maim if I could
begin with you uh first of all we heard
that it's costing Israel 246 million us
a day how big is the financial burden on
Israel as it carries out this
war the Israeli oper War operation cost
a lot I'm not an expert on
security F Financial issues but uh the
imagine that the whole economy is STO
the tens of thousands of productive
people are recruited and deployed along
the borders so the whole economy is in
hold and the Israeli shekel is losing
VAV V the American dollar so it's a
huge huge burden on Israeli
economy what what was maybe uh cannot be
re repair
or be be come back within a short
period Natasha we've heard economists
War warn uh it's saying that the cost of
Israel will be unlike anything it has
experienced in deca ades do you think
that the people there and the government
is prepared to pay for this war in the
long
term are you speaking of the government
of Israel
yes I I think based on what Netanyahu
has said that they are incredibly
determined uh and that there's no
turning back uh from what I've heard
it's been described as their own 911 if
you were to compare uh the US spent two
trillion the war on terror uh in
response to 911 so when there's been a
trauma often governments get behind
sometimes incredibly expensive uh War
efforts uh to to address the the trauma
that the public may feel whether that is
wrong or right but that seems to be what
has happened in the past and of course
this has incredibly um detrimental
effects on civilian death toll uh and
escalation uh but I can imagine IM the
resolve is quite
strong Yousef we've seen the
humanitarian toll uh that the people in
Gaza have had have had to Bear over the
last several weeks but what about Hamas
in particular I mean where does it get
its money from and its arms and
presumably those are now getting
reinforcements into the strip obviously
is not going to happen because of the
blockade uh and the closure of the
borders completely what happens from
hamas's perspective about having to
continually defend itself against Israel
from
here well I think the short answer is we
simply don't know we don't know where
this is uh going we don't know how it's
going to end uh we don't know what Gaza
will look like if there if there is a uh
Gaza at the end uh of the uh Israeli
campaign there if you listen to some of
the statements from Israeli officials
talking about Annihilation talking about
making Gaza a place that is unlivable um
it's it's uh it's hard to to really
imagine what uh what this place will
look like when they are done we've seen
massive bombardment with a huge
percentage of the uh structures in Gaza
being uh decimated of course this leads
to to uh large scale depopulation as
well um and there's no clear sense of
when the people who lived uh in those
places will be able to go back to their
homes and if they will be able to go
back to their homes so we're talking
about a um a completely different uh
Paradigm than the one that existed prior
uh to October 7th in Gaza which itself
uh was an a humanitarian crisis to begin
with and an extremely desperate
situation for most of the people uh that
live there so um it's it's it's simply
not clear what we do know is that the
costs will be extremely high and those
who are the most vulnerable in society
will um bear the the the brunt of it man
we know that uh the US has backed Israel
wholeheartedly uh since the beginning of
this war and it gives roughly $38
billion a year and there is another
financial aid package has been proposed
uh by Joe Biden's Administration how
dependent is Israel on the US when it
comes to this war obviously today we're
talking financially so from a financial
point of
view from a financial point of view
Israel is not only financial point of
view but also on security wise Israel is
fully dependent on the United on the
United States also politically in the in
un
institutions um so Israel
cannot let's say uh distance itself too
far from the United States Israel must
get now
emergency uh Aid to maintain the war to
continue the war and Israel must
continue getting us financial aid and
political help a backing actually uh the
day after the key question is when the
day after starts when we count the day
after when when the war ends where
will it end with the ceasefire will it
will it end with Israel's evacuating
occupied reoccupied Gaza STP Nobody
Knows the Israelis it seems that the
Israeli Administration has no a plan for
the day after nor a definition when the
day after starts I want to stick with
the United States uh here for a little
bit because they are so integral uh to
all of this now uh the Biden
Administration
put together a $1.5 billion National
Security package that includes military
and humanitarian assistance for
conflicts in Ukraine as well as Israel
uh it uh said 14.3 billion of that is
for Israel but now that there is a new
Speaker of the House Natasha that uh the
Republicans are now saying that they
will put forward a bill that only
focuses on aid for Israel how
complicated is this all getting from a
political point of view and getting
money to Israel I think in terms of
getting money to Israel because the
Republicans are so adamant that they do
want to support Israel and you see not
just the Republican Elites but
Republican support for Israel amongst uh
the the public is is quite High uh and
they're they're going to ensure that the
aid that whatever military aid we're
giving well whatever Ukraine needs may
be up in the air uh Aid to Ukraine is
probably not going to be up in the air
they're going to try to push that
through and you're seeing that there is
some convergence here with Biden who has
been a fairly pro-israeli president
asking for 14 billion as you mentioned
uh and the pressure really will be more
on what happens in the war in Ukraine uh
as Israel starts to need more Precision
guided Munitions artillery rounds and
shells this will going to come at the
same time that Ukraine might be needing
more sophisticated weapons as well and
whether or not the US can produce both
of these uh for both countries at the
same time is is unknown but I think what
we're seeing here with the the political
climate in the US with the Republicans
in control of the house and a more
right-wing speaker uh Mike Johnson than
than even in in the past if that's
possible uh Israel would be the priority
over Aid to
Ukraine youf you're obviously in the
United States and we have seen uh shows
of solidarity rallies there for
Palestinians
uh despite the United States support of
Israel what is the sense there uh in
terms of long-term financially backing
Israel
here I think one of the important
lessons from what we're seeing here in
the United States in terms of the um uh
dwindling support for um financing the
Ukraine war is that Americans have
become quite tired of supporting endless
uh military engagements that they don't
don't quite understand why they are
taking place or why they are so
important and now you know well over a
year into the the you know uh war in
Ukraine um uh more and more Americans
are saying why are we doing this why are
we spending money on this and I think
you know while there is of course a
tremendous political support for Israel
here in the United States uh this is a
message that you know Americans
themselves are are are not not going to
want to engage their tax dollars in an
open-ended way especially when there is
no clear objective no clear endgame in
sight uh when it comes to uh what Israel
is doing uh in uh in Gaza and I would
say that you know we spoke a little bit
earlier about some of the the costs here
and Israel's Reliance on the United
States you know the the Israelis fought
a War in 1967 against multiple State
armies and at that time of course they
relied on on Western Arms but they
didn't rely on Direct American
intervention and today we see Israel you
know needing effectively two if not more
American aircraft carriers um to Stave
off two non-state actors and so I think
Israel has become more reli you know
more more uh you know dependent on the
United States today than it's than it's
ever been and the costs of this are not
just going to be economic they're are
going to be political costs and policy
costs
uh as well that I think are going to
reshape the way um Israeli policy makers
thought about much uh of their of their
you know security situation and their
economic and political relations as well
Natasha just briefly there's obviously
going to be uh an election in the United
States next year how big a part is
financial package to uh Israel going to
play a part in that election do you
think I'm not sure it's going to play a
huge part because we see other issues
becoming more important whether it be
the fight uh for democracy if it's a
Biden Trump uh contest or issues related
to inflation or issues related to The
Border Americans have typically not
prioritized foreign policy issues in in
voting as much as some of these other
domestic issues um but we'll have to see
how things unfold I mean at the moment
though much of the International
Community is asking for a ceasefire and
and very concerned conc erned about the
plight of innocent Palestinian civilians
the polling data that we're seeing in in
the US is showing that Biden is in step
with much of the public um you have even
72% of Democrats saying that they feel
protecting Israel is important aspect of
American foreign policy and 80% of of
Republicans and only 18% of Americans
thought that the Israeli response has
been too harsh uh so I think it's
possible if the war goes on and becomes
very expensive it could be a drain there
could be some fatigue but as long as US
troops aren't directly involved I don't
see this being a huge issue uh in the
2024 election because it'll be
overshadowed by other domestic issues of
course okay thank you I want to get back
to point yeah of course Yousef yeah
because I I do I I do think there are
complications here especially when you
look at sort of the demographic
breakdowns and some of the the polling
on this issue uh there are some key
demographics that the uh Biden campaign
needs to have strong turnout in
particularly younger Americans who see
this situation very differently than uh
their their older counterparts um and I
think that this is going to be a a real
challenge for a Biden reelection
campaign uh and add to that of course an
Arab and Muslim Community here in the
United States uh which is uh outraged
over the Biden administration's approach
to this so far
and when you consider how narrow
elections are here in the United States
and how key constituencies can make
massive uh differences in very specific
States um it it it becomes a significant
problem for a election campaign that
relies on a large and diverse Coalition
uh like the Democrats tend to do and
rely on significant youth turnout as
well so while the overall public opinion
polling is supportive when one reads
between the lines there are uh
significant alarm Bells political alarm
bells that should be going off in uh
Biden Campaign Headquarters yeah I want
to get back to uh the sense inside uh
Israel now manim is there a discussion
going on in Israel at this point in time
a concern over how it will be able to
pay for this war we've seen the Finance
Minister come out and say that this
year's budget is no longer relevant the
S&P Global r agency has downgraded the
economic Outlook from stable to negative
is there any discussion about this at
all only limited discussion there is a
growing awareness of the compensation of
the the huge amount of money needed to
reconstruct the destroyed kibuts and
towns adjacent to Gaza Street they they
are destroyed uh
and add to that the evacuation of those
places tens of thousands of people not
only near Gaza street but also in the
north along the Israeli libanon border
so the people living in distance of up
to five kilometers in the north were
asked by the government to evacuate and
go to hotels that they the government
funds for them temporarily of course so
much depend depends how long the war
continues whether the War uh expands
also to the
north a second front opens between
Israel and
Lebanon add to that that this
functioning Israeli government the
Israeli government performance are very
very poor due to to different causes and
reasons um but but the the performance
are very very full only in the last few
days the Israeli cabinet appointed a
coordinator for
rebuilding the the the South the the
kibuts and towns in South Israel so it
will take much time and uh the Israelis
will learn while walking and uh I I I
don't know how it will end up no Natasha
we heard a little bit there about a
potential uh second front opening what
would be the consequences of if Israel
is forced to fight uh Hezbollah in the
north as well as Hamas in the South well
I think it would be catastrophic and of
course it would be incredibly difficult
for the Israelis to have to do this but
I just worry about the War becoming even
more internationalized Wars that become
more internationalized of course have
much higher civilian death toll and they
go on for much longer uh I mean this
would be the last thing uh that that we
would need of course at a moment when
we're trying to get a ceasefire to
attend to the uh civilian uh casualties
and humanitarian crisis uh facing Gaza
where they're struggling to get food
water and
electricity uh and just basic needs met
and if if we then get into a second
front uh this will put a strain on any
kind of effort to do this but then we
also see that when International actors
get involved uh the death toll just
Rises as I mentioned yeah Yousef there's
obviously the occupied West Bank which
is another issue here obviously people
in Gaza are living a nightmare at this
point in time and there's the financial
impact that this war is going to have
inside Israel but what about for those
Palestinians trying to earn a living in
the occupied West Bank how difficult is
that now and will it continue to be in
the
future yes well there's there are parts
of the West Bank including in uh area C
where some Palestinians live where the
economic situation has for many years
been more desperate than the economic
situation uh in Gaza which is something
we don't often hear about and can't
really wrap our heads around um but of
course the the military occupation in in
the West Bank is debilitating for uh its
uh economic prospects and um really
deprives uh billions of dollars uh worth
of economic growth from the the
Palestinian economy in the West Bank you
know since October 7th uh things in the
West Bank have become have become much
much worse um Israeli settlers uh who
received additional arms uh from uh
their supporters in the Israeli
government have carried out numerous
attacks against pales Ians in the West
Bank this is uh something that has been
escalating uh in uh recent months and
years prior to October 7th uh and there
is uh elevated violence against
Palestinians now uh in the West Bank
with over a 100 Palestinians that have
been killed by their soldiers uh or
settlers uh since October 7th this comes
at a time where violence against
Palestinians in the West Bank was at its
highest point uh since um International
organizations like the United Nations
have been keeping track of of the
statistics there on these things so the
situation uh is extremely volatile uh
and you know we talk about the
possibility of a of a northern uh front
there's of course the real possibility
that there is massive destabilization in
uh the West Bank as well um and we see a
a spread uh of this across the entirety
of the map not just you know uh outside
outside of of Israel and Palestine but
inside of it as well Natasha I'm sure
that you've seen uh some of the huge
protests the relies of uh solidarity for
Palestinians that have been taking place
right around the world I mean for
example in London we saw hundreds and
hundreds of thousands of people take to
the streets and one of the main things
that they are calling for uh is the UK
to stop uh funding stop supporting
Israel how much pressure is coming on
these Western governments to pullit
support of Israel and what consequences
will that have do you
think well there's certainly protests
going around around the world not just
London but are also uh in the US as well
uh from from people uh upset about the
government support of Israel and and
wanting to take a tougher stand or at
least in trying to pressure Israel to to
respond with more restraint in in Gaza
uh and to get some sort of ceasefire and
to attend to to the needs of innocent
civilians uh but whether or not that
actually results in a policy change you
know we've seen there have been many
protests over conflicts over time if you
look at the big picture it often only
just to small changes of course there's
counter examples where something
actually works where the protest
movement um is able to influence
government but if we were to look at all
of these different episodes of protest
and and applying pressure on governments
uh governments ultimately end up doing
what they feel they need to do of what
is their best interest uh in in these
particular
moments minim we've got a minute or two
left I just want to ask uh for you to to
sum up the sense of what it is like
there in Israel does it feel like
everyone there doesn't really care about
how much this war is going to cost that
they are willing to pay whatever price
it might be as long as Israel wins
whatever winning looks
like
the W the winning looks like um getting
R completely
from from Ham
Hamas I I think that this is
unachievable uh Israel can get rid of
Hamas leaders but Hamas as an idea or an
social welfare
institution or employee in in Gaza as ad
ad ministration that
runs government agencies in Gaza it will
be impossible and to to to destroy it
will be a big mistake if Israel follows
Bush junr policy in Iraq uh rooting or
creating a chaos in Gaza will backfire
Israel it's
counterproductive Israel must think
seriously how to cooperate with Gaza not
how to destroy Gaza street but the
Israeli mindset is is implementing
Revenge yeah H very anger and frustrated
without thinking politically on the day
after okay thank you so much for your
Insight we really do appreciate all
three of you uh coming on the program
maim Klein Natasha linstead Yousef Muna
thank you so much well thank you to for
watching you can see the program again
anytime by visiting our website eler.com
and for further discussion go to our
Facebook page that's
facebook.com AJ insidestory you can also
join the conversation on X our handle is
at AJ Inside Story for me Tom McCrae and
the whole team here bye for
[Music]
now